Q: What is Foce?
A: In physics, a force is any interaction that, when unopposed, will change the motion of an object.[1] A force can cause an object with mass to change its velocity (which includes to begin moving from a state of rest), i.e., to accelerate. Force can also be described intuitively as a push or a pull. A force has both magnitude and direction, making it a vector quantity.
It is measured in the SI unit of newtons and represented by the symbol F.

I know about 35 more terms called "Force". You don't really want me to list them all, do you?

Q: What is change in state of motion?
A: Sorry, I just don't know what the change is in the state of motion.

Q: Give examples of Non Contact Force. 
A: I hope you can find the relevant information here:
Non-contact force (term in Wikipedia)

Q: Differentiate between contact and non contact force.
A: I hope you can find the relevant information here:
Non-contact force (term in Wikipedia)

Q: What happens to pressure when force increases?
A: Unfortunately, I wasn't told what happens to the pressure when the force increases.

Q: What brings change in state of motion?
A: Sorry, I don't know the answer.

Q: What happens when two forces act in the same direction
A: Sorry, I don't have this information.



//What happens to pressure when force increases //Bi-DAF 
changes the shape of balloon.

(ii) You can change the shape of rubber band and spring by stretching it in opposite direction.

(iii)You can change the shape of dough into bread by applying force with a rolling pin.
So we can say that forces can change the shape of an object.

Types of Force:
1. Contact Force:
(a) For contact force, interaction between objects is necessary. Force that comes into action after the interaction between objects is called contact force. Contact force works on the point of contact. Example; pushing a car, hitting the ball, kicking a ball, etc.
(b) Muscular force, friction force are types of contact force.

(a) Muscular force:
(i) Force due to the action of muscles is called muscular force. We can say force resulting because of action of muscle is called muscular force
