Muscular Force
Can you push or lift a book lying on a
table without touching it? Can you lift
a bucket of water without holding it?
Generally, to apply a force on an object,
your body has to be in contact with the
object. The contact may also be with the help of a stick or a piece of rope. When
we push an object like a school bag or
lift a bucket of water, where does the
force come from? This force is caused
by the action of muscles in our body.
The force resulting due to the action of
muscles is known as the muscular
force.
It is the muscular force that enables
us to perform all activities involving
movement or bending of our body. In
Class VII you have learnt that in the
process of digestion the food gets
pushed through the alimentary canal.
Could it be a muscular force that does
it? You also know that lungs expand
and contract while we inhale and
exhale air during breathing. Where
are these muscles located which
make breathing possible? Can you list
a few more examples of the force
exerted by the muscles in our body?
Animals also make use of muscular
force to carry out their physical activities
and other tasks. Animals like bullocks,
horses, donkeys and camels are used to
per for m various tasks for us. In
per for ming these tasks they use
muscular force (Fig. 11.9).
Muscular force of animals is used to
carry out many difficult tasks
Since muscular force can be applied
only when it is in contact with an object,
it is also called a contact force. Are there
other types of contact forces? Let us find
out.
Friction
Recall some of your experiences. A ball
rolling along the ground gradually slows
down and finally comes to rest. When
we stop pedalling a bicycle, it gradually
slows down and finally comes to a stop.
A car or a scooter also comes to rest
once its engine is switched off. Similarly,
a boat comes to rest if we stop rowing
it. Can you add some more such
experiences?
In all these situations no force
appears to be acting on the objects, yet
their speed gradually decreases and
they come to rest after some time. What
causes a change in their state of motion?
Could some force be acting on them!
Can you guess the direction in which
the force must be acting in each case?
The force responsible for changing the
state of motion of objects in all these
examples is the force of friction. It is the
force of friction between the surface of
the ball and the ground that brings the
moving ball to rest. Similarly, friction
between water and the boat brings it to
a stop once you stop rowing.
The force of friction always acts on
all the moving objects and its direction
is always opposite to the direction of
motion. Since the force of friction arises
due to contact between surfaces, it is
also an example of a contact force. You
will learn more about this force in
Chapter 12.
You may be wondering whether it is
essential for the agent applying a force
on an object to be always in contact with
it. Let us find out.
