Take a transparent glass tube or a
plastic pipe. The length of the pipe/
tube should be about 25 cm and its
diameter should be 5-7.5 cm. Also
take a piece of thin sheet of a good
quality rubber, say, a rubber
balloon. Stretch the rubber sheet
tightly over one end of the pipe.
Hold the pipe at the middle, keeping
it in a vertical position (Fig.11.14).
Ask one of your friends to pour some
water in the pipe. Does the rubber
sheet bulge out? Note also the
height of the water column in the
pipe. Pour some more water.
Observe again the bulge in the
rubber sheet and the height of the
water column in the pipe. Repeat
this process a few more times. Can
you see any relation between the
amount of the bulge in the rubber
sheet and the height of the water
column in the pipe?
Take a plastic bottle. You can take
a discarded water or soft drink
bottle. Fix a cylindrical glass tube,
a few cm long near its bottom as
shown in Fig. 11.15. You can do so
by slightly heating one end of the
glass tube and then quickly
inserting it near the bottom of the
bottle. Make sure that the water
does not leak from the joint. If there
is any leakage, seal it with molten
wax. Cover the mouth of the glass
tube with a thin rubber sheet as you
did in Activity 11.8. Now fill the
bottle upto half with water. What do
you observe? Why does the rubber
A liquid exerts pressure on the
walls of the container.
Note that the rubber sheet has been
fixed on the side of the container and not
at the bottom. Does the bulging of the
rubber sheet in this case indicate that water
exerts pressure on the sides of the container
as well? Let us investigate further.
Take an empty plastic bottle or a
cylindrical container. You can take
a used tin can or a used plastic
bottle. Drill four holes all around
near the bottom of the bottle. Make
sure that the holes are at the same
height from the bottom (Fig. 11.16).
Now fill the bottle with water. What
do you observe?
Do the different streams of water
coming out of the holes fall at the
same distance from the bottle? What
does this indicate?Liquids exert equal pressure at
the same depth Can you now say that liquids exert
pressure on the walls of the
container?
Do gases also exert pressure? Do
they also exert pressure on the walls of
their containers? Let us find out.I have seen fountains of water
coming out of the leaking joints
or holes in pipes supplying
water. Is it not due to the
pressure exerted by water on the
walls of the pipes?When you inflate a balloon, why do
you have to close its mouth? What
happens when you open the mouth of
an inflated balloon? Suppose you have
a balloon which has holes. Would you
be able to inflate it? If not, why? Can we
say that air exerts pressure in all
directions?
Do you recall what happens to the
air in the bicycle tube when it has a
puncture? Do these observations suggest
that air exerts pressure on the inner walls
of an inflated balloon or a tube? So, we
find that gases, too, exert pressure on
the walls of their container.But, how large or small is the
atmospheric pressure? Let us get an
idea about its magnitude.