Magnetic Force
Take a pair of bar magnets. Place
the longer side of one of the magnets
over three round shaped pencils or
wooden rollers as shown in
Fig.11.10. Now bring one end of the
other magnet near the end of the
magnet placed on the rollers. Make
sure that the two magnets do not
touch each other. Observe what
happens. Next, bring the other end
of the magnet near the same end of
the magnet placed on the rollers
(Fig.11.10). Note what happens to
the magnet placed on the rollers
every time another magnet is
brought near it.
Observing attraction and repulsion
between two magnets
Does the magnet on the rollers begin
to move when the other magnet is brought
near it? Does it always move in the
direction of the approaching magnet?
What do these observations suggest? Does
it mean that some force must be acting
between the two magnets?
You have learnt in Class VI that like
poles of two magnets repel each other and
unlike poles attract each other. Attraction
or repulsion between objects can also be
seen as another form of pull or push. Do
you have to bring the magnets in contact
for observing the force between them? A
magnet can exert a force on another
magnet without being in contact with it.
The force exerted by a magnet is an
example of a non-contact force.
Similarly, the force exerted by a
magnet on a piece of iron is also a non-
contact force.
Electrostatic Force
Activity 11.7
Take a plastic straw and cut it into
nearly two equal pieces. Suspend one
of the pieces from the edge of a table
with the help of a piece of thread (Fig.
11.11). Now hold the other piece of
straw in your hand and rub its free
end with a sheet of paper. Bring the
rubbed end of the straw near the
suspended straw. Make sure that the
two pieces do not touch each other.
What do you observe?
Next, rub the free end of the
suspended piece of straw with a
sheet of paper. Again, bring the piece
of straw that was rubbed earlier with
paper near the free end of the
suspended straw. What do you
observe now?
A straw rubbed with paper attracts
another straw but repels it if it has
also been rubbed with a sheet of
paper A straw is said to have acquired
electrostatic charge after it has been
rubbed with a sheet of paper. Such a
straw is an example of a charged body.
The force exerted by a charged body
on another charged or uncharged body
is known as electrostatic force. This
force comes into play even when the
bodies are not in contact. The
electrostatic force, therefore, is another
example of a non-contact force. You will
learn more about electric charges in
Chapter 15.
Gravitational Force
You know that a coin or a pen falls to the
ground when it slips off your hand.
Leaves and fruits also fall to the ground
when they get detached from the plant.
Have you ever wondered why it is so?
When the coin is held in your hand it
is at rest. As soon as it is released, it
begins to move downwards. It is clear that
the state of motion of the coin undergoes
a change. Can this happen without a
force acting on it? Which is this force?
Objects or things fall towards the
earth because it pulls them. This force
is called the force of gravity, or just
gravity. This is an attractive force. The
force of gravity acts on all objects. The
force of gravity acts on all of us all the
time without our being aware of it. Water
begins to flow towards the ground as
soon as we open a tap. Water in rivers
flows downward due to the force of
gravity.Gravity is not a property of the earth
alone. In fact, every object in the
universe, whether small or large,
exerts a force on every other object.
This force is known as the
gravitational force.